docs/general/agent-setup/beads-setup.md, before:

## Issue Tracking with bd (beads)

**IMPORTANT**: This project uses **bd (beads)** for ALL issue tracking.
Do NOT use markdown TODOs or other ad-hoc issue tracking methods.

**Run this now** to check if `bd` is available:

```bash
bd status || echo "bd not installed"
```

**If bd is not installed:**

Note: `npm install -g @beads/bd` and `go install` methods exist but typically fail in
cloud environments (Claude Code web, containers) due to network restrictions.
Use the direct download method:

**Quick install (Linux x86_64 / amd64):**

```bash
# Get latest version, download, and install
curl -sI https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/latest | grep -i "^location:"
# Note the version (e.g., v0.35.0), then:
curl -fsSL -o /tmp/beads.tar.gz "https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/download/v0.35.0/beads_0.35.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz"
tar -xzf /tmp/beads.tar.gz -C /tmp
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
cp /tmp/bd ~/.local/bin/
chmod +x ~/.local/bin/bd
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
bd prime   # Get workflow context
```

**For other platforms**, run each step separately:

```bash
# Step 1: Detect platform
uname -s | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'   # OS: linux, darwin
uname -m                                  # ARCH: x86_64->amd64, aarch64->arm64

# Step 2: Get latest version
curl -sI https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/latest | grep -i "^location:"
# Extract version from URL (e.g., v0.35.0)

# Step 3: Download (substitute OS, ARCH, VERSION)
# Example: beads_0.35.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz or beads_0.35.0_darwin_arm64.tar.gz
curl -fsSL -o /tmp/beads.tar.gz "https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/download/VERSION/beads_VERSION_OS_ARCH.tar.gz"

# Step 4: Install
tar -xzf /tmp/beads.tar.gz -C /tmp
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
cp /tmp/bd ~/.local/bin/
chmod +x ~/.local/bin/bd
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
bd prime
```

For troubleshooting, see: https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases

**If bd says `Error: no beads database found`:**
```bash
bd init
bd prime
```

**If you encounter other errors:**
```bash
bd doctor       # Check installation health
bd doctor --fix # Fix any setup issues
```

**SQLite WAL mode errors (common in containers/VMs):**

If you see `failed to enable WAL mode: sqlite3: locking protocol`, use JSONL-only mode:

```bash
# Add to config permanently (recommended)
echo "no-db: true" >> .beads/config.yaml

# Or use --no-db flag for each command
bd --no-db status
```

`--no-db` mode reads/writes directly to `.beads/issues.jsonl` without SQLite.
This is fully functional for all workflows.

### Issue Types

- `bug` - Something broken

- `feature` - New functionality

- `task` - Work item (tests, docs, refactoring)

- `epic` - Large feature with subtasks

- `chore` - Maintenance (dependencies, tooling)

- `merge-request` - Code review / merge request

- `molecule` - Work template (advanced)

### Priorities

Use `0-4` or `P0-P4` format (NOT "high"/"medium"/"low"):

- `0` / `P0` - Critical (security, data loss, broken builds)

- `1` / `P1` - High (major features, important bugs)

- `2` / `P2` - Medium (default, nice-to-have)

- `3` / `P3` - Low (polish, optimization)

- `4` / `P4` - Backlog (future ideas)

### Workflow for AI Agents

1. **Check ready work**: `bd ready` shows unblocked issues

2. **Claim your task**: `bd update <id> --status in_progress`

3. **Work on it**: Implement, test, document

4. **Discover new work?** Create linked issue:

   - `bd create "Found bug" -p 1 --deps "discovered-from:<parent-id>"`

   - Dependencies format: `'type:id'` or `'id'` (e.g.,
     `'discovered-from:bd-20,blocks:bd-15'`)

5. **Complete**: `bd close <id>` or close multiple at once: `bd close <id1> <id2> ...`

6. **Session close protocol** (CRITICAL - before saying “done”):
   ```bash
   git status              # Check what changed
   git add <files>         # Stage code changes
   bd sync --from-main     # Pull beads updates from main
   git commit -m "..."     # Commit code changes
   ```

### Sync & Collaboration

bd automatically syncs with git:

- Exports to `.beads/issues.jsonl` after CRUD operations (5s debounce)

- Imports from JSONL when newer than DB (e.g., after `git pull`)

- Run `bd sync --from-main` at session end (especially for ephemeral branches)

- Check sync status: `bd sync --status`

### Useful Commands

- `bd ready` - Show issues ready to work (no blockers)

- `bd blocked` - Show blocked issues

- `bd show <id>` - Detailed issue view with dependencies

- `bd doctor` - Check and fix beads installation health

- `bd quickstart` - Quick start guide

- `bd prime` - Get workflow context (auto-called by hooks)

- `bd <command> --help` - See all flags for any command

### Important Rules

- Use bd for ALL task tracking

- Always use `--json` flag for programmatic use

- Link discovered work with `discovered-from` dependencies

- Check `bd ready` before asking “what should I work on?”

- Store AI planning docs in `history/` directory

- Run `bd <cmd> --help` to discover available flags

- Run `bd sync --from-main` at session end

- Do NOT use "high"/"medium"/"low" for priorities (use 0-4 or P0-P4)

- Do NOT use external issue trackers

- Do NOT duplicate tracking systems

- Do NOT clutter repo root with planning documents

Commit message:

fix(beads): Preserve closed issue statuses and document merge driver
- Reset issues.jsonl to main's version (preserving closed statuses)
- Add only new issues: markform-70 (CLI review) and markform-71 (ESM migration)
- Configure git merge driver for beads JSONL (bd merge)
- Document merge driver setup in beads-setup.md

The merge driver prevents future conflicts from corrupting issue statuses
during git merge operations.

docs/general/agent-setup/beads-setup.md, after:

## Issue Tracking with bd (beads)

**IMPORTANT**: This project uses **bd (beads)** for ALL issue tracking.
Do NOT use markdown TODOs or other ad-hoc issue tracking methods.

**Run this now** to check if `bd` is available:

```bash
bd status || echo "bd not installed"
```

**If bd is not installed:**

Note: `npm install -g @beads/bd` and `go install` methods exist but typically fail in
cloud environments (Claude Code web, containers) due to network restrictions.
Use the direct download method:

**Quick install (Linux x86_64 / amd64):**

```bash
# Get latest version, download, and install
curl -sI https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/latest | grep -i "^location:"
# Note the version (e.g., v0.35.0), then:
curl -fsSL -o /tmp/beads.tar.gz "https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/download/v0.35.0/beads_0.35.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz"
tar -xzf /tmp/beads.tar.gz -C /tmp
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
cp /tmp/bd ~/.local/bin/
chmod +x ~/.local/bin/bd
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
bd prime   # Get workflow context
```

**For other platforms**, run each step separately:

```bash
# Step 1: Detect platform
uname -s | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'   # OS: linux, darwin
uname -m                                  # ARCH: x86_64->amd64, aarch64->arm64

# Step 2: Get latest version
curl -sI https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/latest | grep -i "^location:"
# Extract version from URL (e.g., v0.35.0)

# Step 3: Download (substitute OS, ARCH, VERSION)
# Example: beads_0.35.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz or beads_0.35.0_darwin_arm64.tar.gz
curl -fsSL -o /tmp/beads.tar.gz "https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases/download/VERSION/beads_VERSION_OS_ARCH.tar.gz"

# Step 4: Install
tar -xzf /tmp/beads.tar.gz -C /tmp
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin
cp /tmp/bd ~/.local/bin/
chmod +x ~/.local/bin/bd
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
bd prime
```

For troubleshooting, see: https://github.com/steveyegge/beads/releases

**If bd says `Error: no beads database found`:**
```bash
bd init
bd prime
```

**If you encounter other errors:**
```bash
bd doctor       # Check installation health
bd doctor --fix # Fix any setup issues
```

**SQLite WAL mode errors (common in containers/VMs):**

If you see `failed to enable WAL mode: sqlite3: locking protocol`, use JSONL-only mode:

```bash
# Add to config permanently (recommended)
echo "no-db: true" >> .beads/config.yaml

# Or use --no-db flag for each command
bd --no-db status
```

`--no-db` mode reads/writes directly to `.beads/issues.jsonl` without SQLite.
This is fully functional for all workflows.

### Git Merge Driver (IMPORTANT)

The beads JSONL file requires a custom git merge driver to handle 3-way merges correctly.
Without it, git will use line-based merging which can corrupt issue statuses during merges.

**Check if configured:**
```bash
git config --get merge.beads.driver || echo "Not configured"
```

**Configure if missing:**
```bash
git config merge.beads.driver "bd merge %A %O %A %B"
git config merge.beads.name "bd JSONL merge driver"
```

The `.gitattributes` file should already contain:
```
.beads/issues.jsonl merge=beads
```

**Note:** `bd init` automatically configures the merge driver. If you cloned an existing
repo with beads, run the config commands above or `bd doctor --fix` to set it up.

### Issue Types

- `bug` - Something broken

- `feature` - New functionality

- `task` - Work item (tests, docs, refactoring)

- `epic` - Large feature with subtasks

- `chore` - Maintenance (dependencies, tooling)

- `merge-request` - Code review / merge request

- `molecule` - Work template (advanced)

### Priorities

Use `0-4` or `P0-P4` format (NOT "high"/"medium"/"low"):

- `0` / `P0` - Critical (security, data loss, broken builds)

- `1` / `P1` - High (major features, important bugs)

- `2` / `P2` - Medium (default, nice-to-have)

- `3` / `P3` - Low (polish, optimization)

- `4` / `P4` - Backlog (future ideas)

### Workflow for AI Agents

1. **Check ready work**: `bd ready` shows unblocked issues

2. **Claim your task**: `bd update <id> --status in_progress`

3. **Work on it**: Implement, test, document

4. **Discover new work?** Create linked issue:

   - `bd create "Found bug" -p 1 --deps "discovered-from:<parent-id>"`

   - Dependencies format: `'type:id'` or `'id'` (e.g.,
     `'discovered-from:bd-20,blocks:bd-15'`)

5. **Complete**: `bd close <id>` or close multiple at once: `bd close <id1> <id2> ...`

6. **Session close protocol** (CRITICAL - before saying “done”):
   ```bash
   git status              # Check what changed
   git add <files>         # Stage code changes
   bd sync --from-main     # Pull beads updates from main
   git commit -m "..."     # Commit code changes
   ```

### Sync & Collaboration

bd automatically syncs with git:

- Exports to `.beads/issues.jsonl` after CRUD operations (5s debounce)

- Imports from JSONL when newer than DB (e.g., after `git pull`)

- Run `bd sync --from-main` at session end (especially for ephemeral branches)

- Check sync status: `bd sync --status`

### Useful Commands

- `bd ready` - Show issues ready to work (no blockers)

- `bd blocked` - Show blocked issues

- `bd show <id>` - Detailed issue view with dependencies

- `bd doctor` - Check and fix beads installation health

- `bd quickstart` - Quick start guide

- `bd prime` - Get workflow context (auto-called by hooks)

- `bd <command> --help` - See all flags for any command

### Important Rules

- Use bd for ALL task tracking

- Always use `--json` flag for programmatic use

- Link discovered work with `discovered-from` dependencies

- Check `bd ready` before asking “what should I work on?”

- Store AI planning docs in `history/` directory

- Run `bd <cmd> --help` to discover available flags

- Run `bd sync --from-main` at session end

- Do NOT use "high"/"medium"/"low" for priorities (use 0-4 or P0-P4)

- Do NOT use external issue trackers

- Do NOT duplicate tracking systems

- Do NOT clutter repo root with planning documents
