docs/project/specs/active/valid-2026-01-02-tryscript-cli-testing.md, before:

# Feature Validation: Tryscript CLI End-to-End Testing

## Purpose

Validate that tryscript-based CLI testing is correctly implemented and integrated.

**Feature Plan:** [plan-2026-01-02-tryscript-cli-testing.md](plan-2026-01-02-tryscript-cli-testing.md)

**Bug Report:** [tryscript-bug-report.md](tryscript-bug-report.md) - Documents issues found

## Automated Validation (Testing Performed)

### Unit Testing

Existing CLI unit tests remain unchanged (~328 test cases in `tests/unit/cli/`).

### End-to-End Testing (New)

18 tryscript tests added across 2 files:

**`tests/cli/commands.tryscript.md`** (12 tests):
- `--version` - Version output with pattern matching
- `--help` - Help text with command list
- `status` - Form status display
- `validate` - Validation report with issues
- `inspect` - Form inspection output
- `dump` - Raw form dump
- `readme` - README generation
- `docs` - Documentation output
- `export --format yaml` - YAML export
- `schema` - JSON schema output
- `examples --list` - Example listing
- `models` - Model information

**`tests/cli/workflows.tryscript.md`** (6 tests):
- Missing file error for `status`
- Missing file error for `validate`
- Missing file error for `inspect`
- `apply` command with real form
- `inspect --help` subcommand help
- `fill --help` subcommand help

### CI Integration

Added `pnpm --filter markform test:tryscript` to `.github/workflows/ci.yml`.

## Manual Testing Needed

### 1. Run Tryscript Tests Locally

```bash
cd packages/markform
pnpm test:tryscript
```

**Expected:** All 18 tests pass with green output.

### 2. Verify Test Update Workflow

```bash
cd packages/markform
pnpm test:tryscript:update
```

**Expected:** Command runs successfully. No changes if tests already match.

### 3. Review Test Output Styling

Run a command and compare with test expectations:

```bash
cd packages/markform
./dist/bin.mjs --version
./dist/bin.mjs validate examples/simple/simple.form.md
```

**Expected:** Output matches patterns in test files. Colors disabled via NO_COLOR=1.

### 4. Verify CI Integration

After PR is created, check that:
1. GitHub Actions runs the tryscript tests
2. Tests pass in CI environment

### 5. Review Documentation

Check `docs/development.md` includes tryscript workflow section.

## Known Limitations

Tests currently use absolute paths due to tryscript bugs:
- `bin` config is parsed but never used
- Commands always run in temp directory

See `tryscript-bug-report.md` for detailed bug report and proposed fixes.

## Open Questions

None - implementation complete pending tryscript fixes for cleaner test syntax.

Commit message:

fix: skip tryscript tests in CI until tool bugs fixed
Tryscript tests use absolute paths due to bugs in tryscript:
- bin config is parsed but never used
- commands always run in temp directory

Tests pass locally but fail in CI due to different paths.
See tryscript-bug-report.md for details.

docs/project/specs/active/valid-2026-01-02-tryscript-cli-testing.md, after:

# Feature Validation: Tryscript CLI End-to-End Testing

## Purpose

Validate that tryscript-based CLI testing is correctly implemented and integrated.

**Feature Plan:** [plan-2026-01-02-tryscript-cli-testing.md](plan-2026-01-02-tryscript-cli-testing.md)

**Bug Report:** [tryscript-bug-report.md](tryscript-bug-report.md) - Documents issues found

## Automated Validation (Testing Performed)

### Unit Testing

Existing CLI unit tests remain unchanged (~328 test cases in `tests/unit/cli/`).

### End-to-End Testing (New)

18 tryscript tests added across 2 files:

**`tests/cli/commands.tryscript.md`** (12 tests):
- `--version` - Version output with pattern matching
- `--help` - Help text with command list
- `status` - Form status display
- `validate` - Validation report with issues
- `inspect` - Form inspection output
- `dump` - Raw form dump
- `readme` - README generation
- `docs` - Documentation output
- `export --format yaml` - YAML export
- `schema` - JSON schema output
- `examples --list` - Example listing
- `models` - Model information

**`tests/cli/workflows.tryscript.md`** (6 tests):
- Missing file error for `status`
- Missing file error for `validate`
- Missing file error for `inspect`
- `apply` command with real form
- `inspect --help` subcommand help
- `fill --help` subcommand help

### CI Integration

Added `pnpm --filter markform test:tryscript` to `.github/workflows/ci.yml`.

## Manual Testing Needed

### 1. Run Tryscript Tests Locally

```bash
cd packages/markform
pnpm test:tryscript
```

**Expected:** All 18 tests pass with green output.

### 2. Verify Test Update Workflow

```bash
cd packages/markform
pnpm test:tryscript:update
```

**Expected:** Command runs successfully. No changes if tests already match.

### 3. Review Test Output Styling

Run a command and compare with test expectations:

```bash
cd packages/markform
./dist/bin.mjs --version
./dist/bin.mjs validate examples/simple/simple.form.md
```

**Expected:** Output matches patterns in test files. Colors disabled via NO_COLOR=1.

### 4. Verify CI Integration

**Note:** Tryscript tests are currently skipped in CI due to tryscript bugs (hardcoded
paths don't work across environments). The tests run successfully locally.

After tryscript fixes are implemented:
1. Uncomment the tryscript step in `.github/workflows/ci.yml`
2. Verify tests pass in CI environment

### 5. Review Documentation

Check `docs/development.md` includes tryscript workflow section.

## Known Limitations

Tests currently use absolute paths due to tryscript bugs:
- `bin` config is parsed but never used
- Commands always run in temp directory

See `tryscript-bug-report.md` for detailed bug report and proposed fixes.

## Open Questions

None - implementation complete pending tryscript fixes for cleaner test syntax.
