docs/project/specs/active/valid-2025-12-24-examples-cli-command.md, before:

# Feature Validation: Examples CLI Command

## Purpose

This is a validation spec for the `markform examples` CLI command and the political research
example form. It covers post-testing validation that must be performed by the user to confirm
the feature implementation and testing is adequate.

**Feature Plan:** [plan-2025-12-23-examples-cli-command.md](plan-2025-12-23-examples-cli-command.md)

**Additional Spec:** [plan-2025-12-23-political-research-example.md](plan-2025-12-23-political-research-example.md)

## Stage 4: Validation Stage

## Validation Planning

This implementation adds:
1. The `markform examples` command with interactive menu for scaffolding example forms
2. A new political-research example form for researching political figures
3. A mock Lincoln form demonstrating a filled political research form

## Automated Validation (Testing Performed)

### Unit Testing

17 new unit tests added in `tests/unit/cli/examples.test.ts`:

- Example registry has all required fields (id, title, description, filename, path)
- Each example has unique IDs
- Registry includes simple, political-research, and earnings-analysis examples
- `getExampleIds()` returns array of all example IDs
- `getExampleById()` returns example for valid ID, undefined for invalid
- `loadExampleContent()` loads content for each example type
- `loadExampleContent()` throws for unknown example
- Each example parses as valid form with correct schema ID
- Political-research example has name field with user role
- All examples contain roles in frontmatter content

### Integration and End-to-End Testing

- Build passes with all 310 tests passing
- ESLint and TypeScript typecheck pass
- Pre-commit hooks (typecheck, lint, test) all pass
- Pre-push hooks (test) pass

### Manual Testing Needed

#### 1. Verify `--list` Flag

Run and verify output formatting:

```bash
markform examples --list
```

**Expected output:**
- Lists 3 examples: simple, political-research, earnings-analysis
- Each has title, description, and default filename
- Formatting is clean with proper indentation

#### 2. Verify `--name` Flag with Valid Example

```bash
cd /tmp
markform examples --name simple
# Press Enter to accept default filename
```

**Expected behavior:**
- Prompts for filename with "simple.form.md" as default
- Creates the file in current directory
- Shows success message and suggested next commands

#### 3. Verify `--name` Flag with Invalid Example

```bash
markform examples --name nonexistent
```

**Expected behavior:**
- Shows error message "Unknown example: nonexistent"
- Lists available examples
- Exits with non-zero status

#### 4. Verify Interactive Selection (Optional)

If interactive terminal is available:

```bash
cd /tmp
markform examples
```

**Expected behavior:**
- Shows intro banner
- Presents selection menu with 3 examples and descriptions
- After selection, prompts for filename
- Creates file and shows success message

#### 5. Verify Political Research Form Structure

```bash
markform inspect packages/markform/examples/political-research/political-research.form.md
```

**Expected output:**
- Form ID: political_research
- 7 field groups: Basic Information, Political Affiliation, Personal Life, Office 1-3, Sources
- 33 fields total
- 7 required fields
- Name field shows `[user]` role

#### 6. Verify Mock Lincoln Form

```bash
markform inspect packages/markform/examples/political-research/political-research.mock.lincoln.form.md
```

**Expected output:**
- Form State: ✓ complete
- All required fields filled
- Shows Lincoln biographical data
- Only optional empty fields are for Office 3 predecessor/successor/running_mate

#### 7. Verify Package Includes Examples

```bash
cd packages/markform
npm pack --dry-run 2>&1 | grep examples
```

**Expected output:**
- Should list files under `examples/` directory including:
  - `examples/political-research/political-research.form.md`
  - `examples/political-research/political-research.mock.lincoln.form.md`

## User Review Checklist

- [ ] `markform examples --list` displays correctly
- [ ] `markform examples --name simple` creates file correctly
- [ ] Invalid example name shows appropriate error
- [ ] Political research form structure looks correct
- [ ] Mock Lincoln form is complete with accurate data
- [ ] Examples are included in npm package

Commit message:

docs: emphasize interactive chooser in validation spec
Update validation step #4 from "Optional" to "Primary UX" to reflect
that the interactive chooser is the main user experience when running
`markform examples` without arguments.

docs/project/specs/active/valid-2025-12-24-examples-cli-command.md, after:

# Feature Validation: Examples CLI Command

## Purpose

This is a validation spec for the `markform examples` CLI command and the political research
example form. It covers post-testing validation that must be performed by the user to confirm
the feature implementation and testing is adequate.

**Feature Plan:** [plan-2025-12-23-examples-cli-command.md](plan-2025-12-23-examples-cli-command.md)

**Additional Spec:** [plan-2025-12-23-political-research-example.md](plan-2025-12-23-political-research-example.md)

## Stage 4: Validation Stage

## Validation Planning

This implementation adds:
1. The `markform examples` command with interactive menu for scaffolding example forms
2. A new political-research example form for researching political figures
3. A mock Lincoln form demonstrating a filled political research form

## Automated Validation (Testing Performed)

### Unit Testing

17 new unit tests added in `tests/unit/cli/examples.test.ts`:

- Example registry has all required fields (id, title, description, filename, path)
- Each example has unique IDs
- Registry includes simple, political-research, and earnings-analysis examples
- `getExampleIds()` returns array of all example IDs
- `getExampleById()` returns example for valid ID, undefined for invalid
- `loadExampleContent()` loads content for each example type
- `loadExampleContent()` throws for unknown example
- Each example parses as valid form with correct schema ID
- Political-research example has name field with user role
- All examples contain roles in frontmatter content

### Integration and End-to-End Testing

- Build passes with all 310 tests passing
- ESLint and TypeScript typecheck pass
- Pre-commit hooks (typecheck, lint, test) all pass
- Pre-push hooks (test) pass

### Manual Testing Needed

#### 1. Verify `--list` Flag

Run and verify output formatting:

```bash
markform examples --list
```

**Expected output:**
- Lists 3 examples: simple, political-research, earnings-analysis
- Each has title, description, and default filename
- Formatting is clean with proper indentation

#### 2. Verify `--name` Flag with Valid Example

```bash
cd /tmp
markform examples --name simple
# Press Enter to accept default filename
```

**Expected behavior:**
- Prompts for filename with "simple.form.md" as default
- Creates the file in current directory
- Shows success message and suggested next commands

#### 3. Verify `--name` Flag with Invalid Example

```bash
markform examples --name nonexistent
```

**Expected behavior:**
- Shows error message "Unknown example: nonexistent"
- Lists available examples
- Exits with non-zero status

#### 4. Verify Interactive Chooser (Primary UX)

This is the main user experience - running `markform examples` without arguments shows an
interactive chooser:

```bash
cd /tmp
markform examples
```

**Expected behavior:**
- Shows intro banner "markform examples"
- Presents interactive selection menu with 3 examples
- Each option shows title and description hint
- Arrow keys navigate, Enter selects
- After selection, prompts for filename with editable default
- Creates file and shows success message with suggested next commands

#### 5. Verify Political Research Form Structure

```bash
markform inspect packages/markform/examples/political-research/political-research.form.md
```

**Expected output:**
- Form ID: political_research
- 7 field groups: Basic Information, Political Affiliation, Personal Life, Office 1-3, Sources
- 33 fields total
- 7 required fields
- Name field shows `[user]` role

#### 6. Verify Mock Lincoln Form

```bash
markform inspect packages/markform/examples/political-research/political-research.mock.lincoln.form.md
```

**Expected output:**
- Form State: ✓ complete
- All required fields filled
- Shows Lincoln biographical data
- Only optional empty fields are for Office 3 predecessor/successor/running_mate

#### 7. Verify Package Includes Examples

```bash
cd packages/markform
npm pack --dry-run 2>&1 | grep examples
```

**Expected output:**
- Should list files under `examples/` directory including:
  - `examples/political-research/political-research.form.md`
  - `examples/political-research/political-research.mock.lincoln.form.md`

## User Review Checklist

- [ ] `markform examples` shows interactive chooser menu
- [ ] `markform examples --list` displays correctly
- [ ] `markform examples --name simple` creates file correctly
- [ ] Invalid example name shows appropriate error
- [ ] Political research form structure looks correct
- [ ] Mock Lincoln form is complete with accurate data
- [ ] Examples are included in npm package
