packages/markform/tests/cli/commands.tryscript.md, before:

---
cwd: ../..
env:
  NO_COLOR: "1"
  FORCE_COLOR: "0"
  CLI: ./dist/bin.mjs
timeout: 30000
---

# Markform CLI Command Tests

This file tests all Markform CLI commands for correct output and exit codes.

---

## Global Options

# Test: --version shows version number

```console
$ $CLI --version
[..]
? 0
```

# Test: --help shows usage summary

```console
$ $CLI --help
Usage: markform [options] [command]

Agent-friendly, human-readable, editable forms

Options:
  --version                               output the version number
  --verbose                               Enable verbose output
  --quiet                                 Suppress non-essential output
  --dry-run                               Show what would be done without making changes
  --format <format>                       Output format: console, plaintext, yaml, json, markform, markdown (default: "console")
  --forms-dir <dir>                       Directory for form output (default: ./forms)
  --overwrite                             Overwrite existing field values (default: continue/skip filled)
  -h, --help                              display help for command

Commands:
  readme [options]                        ✨Display README documentation ← START HERE!
  docs [options]                          Display concise Markform syntax reference (agent-friendly)
  spec [options]                          Display the Markform specification
  apis [options]                          Display Markform TypeScript and AI SDK API documentation
  patch [options] <file> <json>           Apply raw typed patches to a form
  browse [options]                        Browse and view files in the forms directory
  dump <file>                             Extract and display form values with state (lightweight inspect)
  examples [options]                      Copy bundled example forms to the forms directory
  export [options] <file>                 Export form as markform (default), markdown (readable), or json/yaml for structured data
  fill [options] <file>                   Run an agent to autonomously fill a form
  inspect [options] <file>                Inspect a form and display its structure, progress, and issues
  models [options]                        List available AI providers and example models
  plan <file>                             Show the idealized execution plan for a form (parallel batches, order levels)
  render [options] <file>                 Render a form as static HTML output
  report [options] <file>                 Generate filtered markdown report (excludes instructions, report=false elements)
  research [options] <input>              Fill a form using a web-search-enabled model
  run [options] [file]                    Browse and run forms from the forms directory
  schema [options] <file>                 Export form structure as JSON Schema
  serve [options] <file>                  Serve a file as a web page (forms are interactive, others are read-only)
  set [options] <file> [fieldId] [value]  Set field values with auto-coercion
  status <file>                           Display form fill status with per-role breakdown
  validate [options] <file>               Validate a form and display summary and issues (no form content)
  help [command]                          display help for command
? 0
```

---

## Inspection Commands

# Test: status shows fill progress

```console
$ $CLI status examples/simple/simple.form.md
Form Status: simple.form.md

Overall: 0/21 fields filled (0%)
  ✓ Complete: 0
  ○ Empty: 21

By Role:
  user: 0/21 filled (0%) ← needs attention

Run Mode: interactive (explicit)
Suggested: markform fill simple.form.md --interactive
? 0
```

# Test: validate shows issues

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple.form.md
Form Validation Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty

Structure:
  Groups: 8
  Fields: 21
  Options: 15

Progress:
  Total fields: 21
  Required: 12
  AnswerState: answered=0, skipped=0, aborted=0, unanswered=21
  Validity: valid=21, invalid=0
  Value: filled=0, empty=21
  Empty required: 12

Issues (21):
...
? 0
```

# Test: inspect shows form structure

```console
$ $CLI inspect examples/simple/simple.form.md
Form Inspection Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty

Structure:
  Groups: 8
  Fields: 21
  Options: 15

Progress:
...
Form Content:
...
Issues (21):
...
? 0
```

# Test: dump shows field values

```console
$ $CLI dump examples/simple/simple-mock-filled.form.md
name: "Alice Johnson"
email: "alice@example.com"
age: 32
score: 87.5
tags: [typescript, testing, forms]
priority: medium
categories: [frontend, backend]
tasks_multi: research:done, design:done, implement:done, test:na
tasks_simple: read_guidelines:done, agree_terms:done
confirmations: backed_up:yes, notified:no
website: "https://alice.dev"
references: [https://docs.example.com/guide, https://github.com/example/project, https://medium.com/article-about-forms]
event_date: 2025-06-15
founded_year: 2020
team_members: (2 rows)
project_tasks: (unanswered)
notes: "This is a test note."
optional_number: (unanswered)
related_url: "https://markform.dev/docs"
optional_date: (unanswered)
optional_year: (unanswered)
? 0
```

---

## Documentation Commands

# Test: readme displays README

```console
$ $CLI readme | head -5
# Markform

[![CI](https://github.com/jlevy/markform/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)][..]
...
? 0
```

# Test: docs shows syntax reference

```console
$ $CLI docs | head -10
# Markform Quick Reference

**Version:** MF/0.1

Markform is structured Markdown for forms.
Files combine YAML frontmatter with HTML comment tags to define typed, validated fields.
Forms render cleanly on GitHub since structure is hidden in comments.

**More info:** [Project README](https://github.com/jlevy/markform) |
[Full Specification](markform-spec.md) (`markform spec`) |
? 0
```

---

## Export Commands

# Test: export --format yaml

```console
$ $CLI export examples/simple/simple.form.md --format yaml | head -15
schema:
  id: simple_test
  title: Simple Test Form
  groups:
    - id: basic_fields
      title: Basic Fields
      children:
        - id: name
          kind: string
          label: Name
          required: true
          placeholder: Enter your name
          examples:
            - John Smith
            - Jane Doe
? 0
```

# Test: schema generates JSON Schema

```console
$ $CLI schema examples/simple/simple.form.md | head -10
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "simple_test",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "name": {
      "type": "string",
      "title": "Name",
      "minLength": 2,
      "maxLength": 50,
? 0
```

---

## Utility Commands

# Test: examples --list shows available examples

```console
$ $CLI examples --list
Available examples:
...
? 0
```

# Test: models lists available providers

```console
$ $CLI models
anthropic/
  env: ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
  models:
...
? 0
```

---

## Report Command

# Test: report generates filtered markdown

```console
$ $CLI report examples/simple/simple-mock-filled.form.md | head -15
# Simple Test Form

A fully interactive form demonstrating all Markform v0.1 field types.
Fill all fields using interactive prompts - no LLM API key needed.

## Basic Fields

**Name:**

Alice Johnson

**Email:**

alice@example.com
? 0
```

# Test: report --help shows command options

```console
$ $CLI report --help
Usage: markform report [options] <file>

Generate filtered markdown report (excludes instructions, report=false elements)
...
? 0
```

---

## Render Command

# Test: render --help shows command options

```console
$ $CLI render --help
Usage: markform render [options] <file>

Render a form as static HTML output
...
? 0
```

# Test: render --dry-run shows what would be done

```console
$ $CLI render examples/simple/simple.form.md --dry-run
[DRY RUN] Would write HTML to: [..]simple.form.html
? 0
```

---

## Spec Command

# Test: spec shows specification

```console
$ $CLI spec | head -10
# Markform Specification

**Version:** MF/0.1 (draft)

## Overview

Markform is a format, data model, and editing API for agent-friendly, human-readable
text forms. The format is a superset of Markdown based on
[Markdoc](https://github.com/markdoc/markdoc) that is easily readable by agents and
humans.
? 0
```

---

## APIs Command

# Test: apis shows API documentation

```console
$ $CLI apis | head -5
# Markform APIs

Markform provides TypeScript APIs for parsing, validating, and manipulating forms
programmatically.
? 0
```

---

## Validate Command --syntax Option

# Test: validate --syntax=comments passes for comment syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-comment-syntax.form.md --syntax=comments
Form Validation Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty
...
? 0
```

# Test: validate --syntax=tags passes for Markdoc syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-tags-syntax.form.md --syntax=tags
Form Validation Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty
...
? 0
```

# Test: validate --syntax=comments fails for Markdoc syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-tags-syntax.form.md --syntax=comments
Syntax violations found (expected: comments):

  Line 13: Markdoc tag found
...
? 1
```

# Test: validate --syntax=tags fails for comment syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple.form.md --syntax=tags
Syntax violations found (expected: tags):

  Line 13: HTML comment found
...
? 1
```

# Test: validate --syntax with invalid value shows error

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple.form.md --syntax=invalid 2>&1 | head -1
Fatal error: Error: Invalid syntax value: invalid. Must be 'comments' or 'tags'.
? 0
```

# Test: validate --syntax=comments with --format json outputs violations

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-tags-syntax.form.md --syntax=comments --format json 2>&1 | grep -A2 '"error"'
  "error": "syntax_violation",
  "expected": "comments",
  "violations": [
? 0
```

Commit message:

feat: implement next command — field advisor for CLI form filling (mf-qpp5)
Read-only command that inspects a form and returns prioritized, filtered,
enriched issues with concrete `set` examples for each field.

- Extract issue filtering from FormHarness into shared issueFiltering.ts
- Three-stage pipeline: order → scope → count cap
- Enriched output: inline field metadata, set_example, skip_example
- Respects frontmatter harnessConfig defaults
- Console and JSON output formats
- 13 unit tests for filtering utilities
- 12 CLI tryscript tests

https://claude.ai/code/session_01AQ19gZfPH68rGK5JWvESo7

packages/markform/tests/cli/commands.tryscript.md, after:

---
cwd: ../..
env:
  NO_COLOR: "1"
  FORCE_COLOR: "0"
  CLI: ./dist/bin.mjs
timeout: 30000
---

# Markform CLI Command Tests

This file tests all Markform CLI commands for correct output and exit codes.

---

## Global Options

# Test: --version shows version number

```console
$ $CLI --version
[..]
? 0
```

# Test: --help shows usage summary

```console
$ $CLI --help
Usage: markform [options] [command]

Agent-friendly, human-readable, editable forms

Options:
  --version                               output the version number
  --verbose                               Enable verbose output
  --quiet                                 Suppress non-essential output
  --dry-run                               Show what would be done without making changes
  --format <format>                       Output format: console, plaintext, yaml, json, markform, markdown (default: "console")
  --forms-dir <dir>                       Directory for form output (default: ./forms)
  --overwrite                             Overwrite existing field values (default: continue/skip filled)
  -h, --help                              display help for command

Commands:
  readme [options]                        ✨Display README documentation ← START HERE!
  docs [options]                          Display concise Markform syntax reference (agent-friendly)
  spec [options]                          Display the Markform specification
  apis [options]                          Display Markform TypeScript and AI SDK API documentation
  patch [options] <file> <json>           Apply raw typed patches to a form
  browse [options]                        Browse and view files in the forms directory
  dump <file>                             Extract and display form values with state (lightweight inspect)
  examples [options]                      Copy bundled example forms to the forms directory
  export [options] <file>                 Export form as markform (default), markdown (readable), or json/yaml for structured data
  fill [options] <file>                   Run an agent to autonomously fill a form
  inspect [options] <file>                Inspect a form and display its structure, progress, and issues
  models [options]                        List available AI providers and example models
  next [options] <file>                   Show prioritized next fields to fill (field advisor for CLI form filling)
  plan <file>                             Show the idealized execution plan for a form (parallel batches, order levels)
  render [options] <file>                 Render a form as static HTML output
  report [options] <file>                 Generate filtered markdown report (excludes instructions, report=false elements)
  research [options] <input>              Fill a form using a web-search-enabled model
  run [options] [file]                    Browse and run forms from the forms directory
  schema [options] <file>                 Export form structure as JSON Schema
  serve [options] <file>                  Serve a file as a web page (forms are interactive, others are read-only)
  set [options] <file> [fieldId] [value]  Set field values with auto-coercion
  status <file>                           Display form fill status with per-role breakdown
  validate [options] <file>               Validate a form and display summary and issues (no form content)
  help [command]                          display help for command
? 0
```

---

## Inspection Commands

# Test: status shows fill progress

```console
$ $CLI status examples/simple/simple.form.md
Form Status: simple.form.md

Overall: 0/21 fields filled (0%)
  ✓ Complete: 0
  ○ Empty: 21

By Role:
  user: 0/21 filled (0%) ← needs attention

Run Mode: interactive (explicit)
Suggested: markform fill simple.form.md --interactive
? 0
```

# Test: validate shows issues

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple.form.md
Form Validation Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty

Structure:
  Groups: 8
  Fields: 21
  Options: 15

Progress:
  Total fields: 21
  Required: 12
  AnswerState: answered=0, skipped=0, aborted=0, unanswered=21
  Validity: valid=21, invalid=0
  Value: filled=0, empty=21
  Empty required: 12

Issues (21):
...
? 0
```

# Test: inspect shows form structure

```console
$ $CLI inspect examples/simple/simple.form.md
Form Inspection Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty

Structure:
  Groups: 8
  Fields: 21
  Options: 15

Progress:
...
Form Content:
...
Issues (21):
...
? 0
```

# Test: dump shows field values

```console
$ $CLI dump examples/simple/simple-mock-filled.form.md
name: "Alice Johnson"
email: "alice@example.com"
age: 32
score: 87.5
tags: [typescript, testing, forms]
priority: medium
categories: [frontend, backend]
tasks_multi: research:done, design:done, implement:done, test:na
tasks_simple: read_guidelines:done, agree_terms:done
confirmations: backed_up:yes, notified:no
website: "https://alice.dev"
references: [https://docs.example.com/guide, https://github.com/example/project, https://medium.com/article-about-forms]
event_date: 2025-06-15
founded_year: 2020
team_members: (2 rows)
project_tasks: (unanswered)
notes: "This is a test note."
optional_number: (unanswered)
related_url: "https://markform.dev/docs"
optional_date: (unanswered)
optional_year: (unanswered)
? 0
```

---

## Documentation Commands

# Test: readme displays README

```console
$ $CLI readme | head -5
# Markform

[![CI](https://github.com/jlevy/markform/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)][..]
...
? 0
```

# Test: docs shows syntax reference

```console
$ $CLI docs | head -10
# Markform Quick Reference

**Version:** MF/0.1

Markform is structured Markdown for forms.
Files combine YAML frontmatter with HTML comment tags to define typed, validated fields.
Forms render cleanly on GitHub since structure is hidden in comments.

**More info:** [Project README](https://github.com/jlevy/markform) |
[Full Specification](markform-spec.md) (`markform spec`) |
? 0
```

---

## Export Commands

# Test: export --format yaml

```console
$ $CLI export examples/simple/simple.form.md --format yaml | head -15
schema:
  id: simple_test
  title: Simple Test Form
  groups:
    - id: basic_fields
      title: Basic Fields
      children:
        - id: name
          kind: string
          label: Name
          required: true
          placeholder: Enter your name
          examples:
            - John Smith
            - Jane Doe
? 0
```

# Test: schema generates JSON Schema

```console
$ $CLI schema examples/simple/simple.form.md | head -10
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "simple_test",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "name": {
      "type": "string",
      "title": "Name",
      "minLength": 2,
      "maxLength": 50,
? 0
```

---

## Utility Commands

# Test: examples --list shows available examples

```console
$ $CLI examples --list
Available examples:
...
? 0
```

# Test: models lists available providers

```console
$ $CLI models
anthropic/
  env: ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
  models:
...
? 0
```

---

## Report Command

# Test: report generates filtered markdown

```console
$ $CLI report examples/simple/simple-mock-filled.form.md | head -15
# Simple Test Form

A fully interactive form demonstrating all Markform v0.1 field types.
Fill all fields using interactive prompts - no LLM API key needed.

## Basic Fields

**Name:**

Alice Johnson

**Email:**

alice@example.com
? 0
```

# Test: report --help shows command options

```console
$ $CLI report --help
Usage: markform report [options] <file>

Generate filtered markdown report (excludes instructions, report=false elements)
...
? 0
```

---

## Render Command

# Test: render --help shows command options

```console
$ $CLI render --help
Usage: markform render [options] <file>

Render a form as static HTML output
...
? 0
```

# Test: render --dry-run shows what would be done

```console
$ $CLI render examples/simple/simple.form.md --dry-run
[DRY RUN] Would write HTML to: [..]simple.form.html
? 0
```

---

## Spec Command

# Test: spec shows specification

```console
$ $CLI spec | head -10
# Markform Specification

**Version:** MF/0.1 (draft)

## Overview

Markform is a format, data model, and editing API for agent-friendly, human-readable
text forms. The format is a superset of Markdown based on
[Markdoc](https://github.com/markdoc/markdoc) that is easily readable by agents and
humans.
? 0
```

---

## APIs Command

# Test: apis shows API documentation

```console
$ $CLI apis | head -5
# Markform APIs

Markform provides TypeScript APIs for parsing, validating, and manipulating forms
programmatically.
? 0
```

---

## Validate Command --syntax Option

# Test: validate --syntax=comments passes for comment syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-comment-syntax.form.md --syntax=comments
Form Validation Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty
...
? 0
```

# Test: validate --syntax=tags passes for Markdoc syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-tags-syntax.form.md --syntax=tags
Form Validation Report
Title: Simple Test Form

Form State: ◌ empty
...
? 0
```

# Test: validate --syntax=comments fails for Markdoc syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-tags-syntax.form.md --syntax=comments
Syntax violations found (expected: comments):

  Line 13: Markdoc tag found
...
? 1
```

# Test: validate --syntax=tags fails for comment syntax file

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple.form.md --syntax=tags
Syntax violations found (expected: tags):

  Line 13: HTML comment found
...
? 1
```

# Test: validate --syntax with invalid value shows error

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple.form.md --syntax=invalid 2>&1 | head -1
Fatal error: Error: Invalid syntax value: invalid. Must be 'comments' or 'tags'.
? 0
```

# Test: validate --syntax=comments with --format json outputs violations

```console
$ $CLI validate examples/simple/simple-tags-syntax.form.md --syntax=comments --format json 2>&1 | grep -A2 '"error"'
  "error": "syntax_violation",
  "expected": "comments",
  "violations": [
? 0
```
