docs/publishing.md, before:

# Publishing

> **Template note**: Replace `OWNER` with your GitHub username/org and `PACKAGE` with
> your package name when adapting this for other projects.

This project uses [Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for version
management and tag-based releases with OIDC trusted publishing to npm.

## One-Time Setup

Before the first release, complete these steps:

### 1. Manual First Publish

The package must exist on npm before OIDC can be configured.
Run from the package directory (important: the root `.npmrc` has pnpm-specific config
that confuses npm):

```bash
cd packages/PACKAGE
npm publish --access public
```

This will prompt for web-based authentication in your browser.

### 2. Configure OIDC Trusted Publishing on npm

1. Go to https://www.npmjs.com/package/PACKAGE/access

2. Under "Publishing access", click "Add a trusted publisher" or "Configure Trusted
   Publishing"

3. Select **GitHub Actions** as the publisher

4. Fill in the form:
   - **Organization or user**: `OWNER`
   - **Repository**: `PACKAGE`
   - **Workflow filename**: `release.yml`
   - **Environment name**: Leave blank (not required unless using GitHub environments)

5. For **Publishing access**, select **"Require two-factor authentication and disallow
   tokens (recommended)"** - OIDC trusted publishers work regardless of this setting

6. Click "Set up connection"

### 3. Verify Repository is Public

OIDC trusted publishing requires a public GitHub repository.

## During Development

Merge PRs to `main` without creating changesets.
Changesets are created only at release time.

## Release Workflow

Follow these steps to publish a new version.
All commands are non-interactive and can be run by an agent or human.

### Step 1: Prepare

```bash
git checkout main
git pull
git status  # Must be clean
```

### Step 2: Determine Version

Review changes since last release:

```bash
git log $(git describe --tags --abbrev=0 2>/dev/null || echo "HEAD~20")..HEAD --oneline
```

Choose version bump:

- `patch` (0.1.0 → 0.1.1): Bug fixes, docs, internal changes

- `minor` (0.1.0 → 0.2.0): New features, non-breaking changes

- `major` (0.1.0 → 1.0.0): Breaking changes

### Step 3: Create Changeset

```bash
pnpm changeset:add <bump> <version> "<summary>"
```

Examples:

```bash
pnpm changeset:add patch 0.1.1 "Fix parsing bug"
pnpm changeset:add minor 0.2.0 "Add new export format"
pnpm changeset:add major 1.0.0 "Breaking API changes"
```

Commit:

```bash
git add .changeset
git commit -m "chore: add changeset for v0.2.0"
```

### Step 4: Version Packages

Run changesets to bump version and update CHANGELOG:

```bash
pnpm version-packages
```

Review and commit:

```bash
git diff  # Verify package.json and CHANGELOG.md
git add .
git commit -m "chore: release PACKAGE v0.2.0"
git push
```

### Step 5: Tag and Release

```bash
git tag v0.2.0
git push --tags
```

### Step 6: Verify

```bash
gh run list --limit 1  # Check release workflow started
gh run view --log      # Watch progress
```

The GitHub Actions workflow will build and publish to npm using OIDC authentication.

## Quick Reference

```bash
# Full release sequence (replace version as needed)
git checkout main && git pull
pnpm changeset:add minor 0.2.0 "Summary of changes"
git add .changeset && git commit -m "chore: add changeset for v0.2.0"
pnpm version-packages
git add . && git commit -m "chore: release PACKAGE v0.2.0"
git push && git tag v0.2.0 && git push --tags
```

## How OIDC Publishing Works

This project uses npm’s trusted publishing via OIDC (OpenID Connect):

- **No tokens to manage**: GitHub Actions presents an OIDC identity to npm

- **No secrets to rotate**: npm issues a one-time credential for each workflow run

- **Provenance attestation**: Published packages include signed build provenance

The release workflow (`.github/workflows/release.yml`) triggers on `v*` tags and
publishes automatically without requiring an `NPM_TOKEN` secret.

## Troubleshooting

**Release workflow not running?**

- Ensure tag format is `v*` (e.g., `v0.2.0`)

- Check tag was pushed: `git ls-remote --tags origin`

**npm publish failing with 401/403?**

- Verify OIDC is configured: https://www.npmjs.com/package/PACKAGE/access

- Check repository is listed under "Trusted Publishing"

- Ensure the repository is public

**First publish?**

- OIDC requires the package to already exist on npm

- Do a manual `npm publish --access public` first (see One-Time Setup)

## Alternative: Interactive Mode

For humans who prefer prompts, use `pnpm changeset` instead of writing the file
directly. It will prompt for package selection, bump type, and description.

## Installing from Git (Bleeding Edge)

To use the latest unreleased code directly from GitHub:

```bash
# pnpm
pnpm add "github:OWNER/PACKAGE#path:packages/PACKAGE"

# npm
npm install "github:OWNER/PACKAGE#path:packages/PACKAGE"
```

This runs the `prepare` script to build from source.

Commit message:

chore: release markform v0.1.1
- Add skip_field operation for optional field skipping
- Add URL field types (url-field, url-list)
- Add web search tool support for live agent
- Add role-aware form completion
- Improve prompts and verbose logging
- Enhance release workflow to create GitHub releases

docs/publishing.md, after:

# Publishing

> **Template note**: Replace `OWNER` with your GitHub username/org and `PACKAGE` with
> your package name when adapting this for other projects.

This project uses [Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for version
management and tag-based releases with OIDC trusted publishing to npm.

## One-Time Setup

Before the first release, complete these steps:

### 1. Manual First Publish

The package must exist on npm before OIDC can be configured.
Run from the package directory (important: the root `.npmrc` has pnpm-specific config
that confuses npm):

```bash
cd packages/PACKAGE
npm publish --access public
```

This will prompt for web-based authentication in your browser.

### 2. Configure OIDC Trusted Publishing on npm

1. Go to https://www.npmjs.com/package/PACKAGE/access

2. Under "Publishing access", click "Add a trusted publisher" or "Configure Trusted
   Publishing"

3. Select **GitHub Actions** as the publisher

4. Fill in the form:
   - **Organization or user**: `OWNER`
   - **Repository**: `PACKAGE`
   - **Workflow filename**: `release.yml`
   - **Environment name**: Leave blank (not required unless using GitHub environments)

5. For **Publishing access**, select **"Require two-factor authentication and disallow
   tokens (recommended)"** - OIDC trusted publishers work regardless of this setting

6. Click "Set up connection"

### 3. Verify Repository is Public

OIDC trusted publishing requires a public GitHub repository.

## During Development

Merge PRs to `main` without creating changesets.
Changesets are created only at release time.

## Release Workflow

Follow these steps to publish a new version.
All commands are non-interactive and can be run by an agent or human.

### Step 1: Prepare

```bash
git checkout main
git pull
git status  # Must be clean
```

### Step 2: Determine Version

Review changes since last release:

```bash
git log $(git describe --tags --abbrev=0 2>/dev/null || echo "HEAD~20")..HEAD --oneline
```

Choose version bump:

- `patch` (0.1.0 → 0.1.1): Bug fixes, docs, internal changes

- `minor` (0.1.0 → 0.2.0): New features, non-breaking changes

- `major` (0.1.0 → 1.0.0): Breaking changes

### Step 3: Create Changeset

```bash
pnpm changeset:add <bump> <version> "<summary>"
```

Examples:

```bash
pnpm changeset:add patch 0.1.1 "Fix parsing bug"
pnpm changeset:add minor 0.2.0 "Add new export format"
pnpm changeset:add major 1.0.0 "Breaking API changes"
```

Commit:

```bash
git add .changeset
git commit -m "chore: add changeset for v0.2.0"
```

### Step 4: Version Packages

Run changesets to bump version and update CHANGELOG:

```bash
pnpm version-packages
```

Review and commit:

```bash
git diff  # Verify package.json and CHANGELOG.md
git add .
git commit -m "chore: release PACKAGE v0.2.0"
git push
```

### Step 5: Tag and Release

```bash
git tag v0.2.0
git push --tags
```

### Step 6: Verify

```bash
gh run list --limit 1  # Check release workflow started
gh run view --log      # Watch progress
```

The GitHub Actions workflow will build and publish to npm using OIDC authentication.

## Quick Reference

```bash
# Full release sequence (replace version as needed)
git checkout main && git pull
pnpm changeset:add minor 0.2.0 "Summary of changes"
git add .changeset && git commit -m "chore: add changeset for v0.2.0"
pnpm version-packages
git add . && git commit -m "chore: release PACKAGE v0.2.0"
git push && git tag v0.2.0 && git push --tags
```

## How OIDC Publishing Works

This project uses npm’s trusted publishing via OIDC (OpenID Connect):

- **No tokens to manage**: GitHub Actions presents an OIDC identity to npm

- **No secrets to rotate**: npm issues a one-time credential for each workflow run

- **Provenance attestation**: Published packages include signed build provenance

The release workflow (`.github/workflows/release.yml`) triggers on `v*` tags and
publishes automatically without requiring an `NPM_TOKEN` secret.

## GitHub Releases

The release workflow automatically creates a GitHub Release when a tag is pushed:

- **Release name**: Matches the tag (e.g., `v0.1.1`)

- **Release notes**: Extracted from the CHANGELOG for the tagged version

- **Pre-release flag**: Automatically set for versions containing `-` (e.g., `1.0.0-beta.1`)

After pushing a tag, verify the release appears at:
`https://github.com/OWNER/PACKAGE/releases`

## Troubleshooting

**Release workflow not running?**

- Ensure tag format is `v*` (e.g., `v0.2.0`)

- Check tag was pushed: `git ls-remote --tags origin`

**npm publish failing with 401/403?**

- Verify OIDC is configured: https://www.npmjs.com/package/PACKAGE/access

- Check repository is listed under "Trusted Publishing"

- Ensure the repository is public

**First publish?**

- OIDC requires the package to already exist on npm

- Do a manual `npm publish --access public` first (see One-Time Setup)

## Alternative: Interactive Mode

For humans who prefer prompts, use `pnpm changeset` instead of writing the file
directly. It will prompt for package selection, bump type, and description.

## Installing from Git (Bleeding Edge)

To use the latest unreleased code directly from GitHub:

```bash
# pnpm
pnpm add "github:OWNER/PACKAGE#path:packages/PACKAGE"

# npm
npm install "github:OWNER/PACKAGE#path:packages/PACKAGE"
```

This runs the `prepare` script to build from source.
